---
title: D&D
classes: single
last_modified_at: 2020-09-26 12:00:00 -0400
header:
  image: 
tags:
  - dnd
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
toc_label: "Contents"
toc_icon: "dice-d20"
excerpt: |
  A short intro to Dungeons & Dragons.
---

{% include video id="_zZxCVBi7-k" provider="youtube" %}

Not sure if you want to play DnD? Go watch 2 episodes of Fantasy High, a hilarious live-play show run by one of the most creative people I've ever seen.
 
This is a rules summary, since the developers' "basic rules" are 180 pages long.

# Dice
There are six sizes of dice generally used for DnD: d20, d12, d10, d8, d6, and d4. The number is the number of sides. Sometimes you'll need to roll multiple dice, like 3d6 (rolling 3 six-side dice), or roll multiple sizes of dice, like 1d10 + 2d8.

## Rolling to Determine Success

The **d20** is used for actions that can result in success, failure, or something in between. After describing what you want to do, the DM will ask for a particular [skill/ability check](#checks-and-saving-throws). The DM sets a **DC** or **difficulty class**, the minimum number you need to succeed. You'll roll a d20, add some flat modifier based on your character's stats (more on that [later](#checks-and-saving-throws)), and tell the DM the total. If your roll is _equal to the DC or higher_, you succeed.

Rolling a **nat 20** (where the d20 roll itself comes up on the 20 face) can result in greater success than simply achieving the DC. A **nat 1** (rolling a 1 on the die) can create a result worse than expected. In combat, nat 20s always hit (and are crits), and nat 1s always miss. They also have specific effects [while you're bleeding out](#death-saving-throws). A common house rule is to make critical successes/failures apply to ability checks as well (seeing tiny details on a nat 20 perception check, or faceplanting on a nat 1 acrobatics check).

If told to roll with **advantage**, roll two dice and take the higher result. **Disadvantage** means rolling two dice and taking the lower result.

# Abilities and Skills

## Checks and Saving Throws

To roll for success/failure:

1. Roll a d20
2. Add the relevant [ability modifier](#ability-scores-and-modifiers)
3. Add your [proficiency bonus](#proficiency), if you're proficient

The DM will tell you what the relevant ability and relevant thing-you-might-be-proficient-in is. A DEX (Stealth) check means that the ability is DEX, and the skill is Stealth. Roll a d20, add your DEX modifier, and add your proficiency bonus if you're proficient in stealth.

For convenience, the DM might abbreviate a DEX (Stealth) check to be a "Stealth check." On your character sheet, you can see that Stealth is based on DEX - so a Stealth check involves rolling a d20, adding DEX, and adding your proficiency bonus if you're proficient in Stealth.

This doesn't stop the DM from switching things up, and asking for a skill check based on a non-default stat. An INT (Stealth) check might using prior knowledge of alternate entrances, exits, and routes in a building in order to sneak around unnoticed.

A **flat ability check** means that only an ability (and no skill) is associated with the roll - so a "flat charisma check" is just rolling a d20 and adding your CHA modifier.

A **saving throw** is a skill check made in response to some event occurring. If Fireball is cast at a character, they will make a DEX saving throw to try and reduce the damage taken. Similar to any other skill check, you roll a d20, add the ability modifier, and add proficiency bonus if you're proficient in that saving throw.

The flat bonuses for all saving throws and ability checks are on the character sheet, but hopefully this helps explain the logic instead of seeing a bunch of +1s and +3s.

## Ability Descriptions

There are six main stats (ability scores) for your character, represented by the six large boxes on your character sheet.

**STR** (strength) is physical power. It increases carrying capacity and the effectiveness of most melee weapons. STR checks often involve short-term high-exertion activities - running, jumping, breaking things, etc. Common primary stat for martial classes, and a dump stat for spellcasters or classes that use DEX for all their weapons.

**DEX** (dexterity) is agility. It increases [initiative](#initiative), [armor class](#armor-class) if wearing no/light/medium armor, and the amount of damage done by ranged weapons (like crossbows) and _Finesse_ weapons (like rapiers and daggers). DEX checks include sneaking, dodging, and pickpocketing. Generally a very useful stat to have.

**CON** (constitution) is stamina and vitality. It increases max HP and how easily a spellcaster can maintain concentration on certain spells. CON checks include holding one's breath, maintaining physical/mental health with limited rest, and generally anything that taxes a character over a period of time. A good stat on all characters to increase HP.

**INT** (intelligence) is book-smarts and logic, and the spellcasting stat for wizards/artificers. INT checks include making deductions based on clues and recalling information. Common dump stat for anybody not playing a wizard or artificer.

**WIS** (wisdom) is gut instincts and intuition, and the spellcasting stat of clerics/druids/rangers. WIS checks include noticing small details, picking up on subtle clues in body language, and administering medical aid. A good stat, since perception and insight are always useful.

**CHA** (charisma) is social prowess and how easily a character gets along with NPCs. It's the spellcasting stat of bards, paladins, sorcerers, and warlocks. CHA checks include deceiving, intimidating, and persuading NPCs.

## Ability scores and modifiers

**Ability scores** range from 1-20. Higher is better, since higher scores mean higher **ability modifiers** (ranging from -5 to +5), which yield rolls which can frequently pass high DC challenges. An average non-adventurer has 10 in all stats, which is +0 to all rolls.

| Score |  1 | 2-3 | 4-5 | 6-7 | 8-9 | 10-11 | 12-13 | 14-15 | 16-17 | 18-19 | 20 |
|-|-:|-:|-:|-:|-:|-:|-:|-:|-:|-:|-:|
| Modifier | -5 |  -4 |  -3 |  -2 |  -1 |   +0  |   +1  |   +2  |   +3  |   +4  | +5 |

Basically, every even number above 10 you get another +1 to your dice rolls involving that stat. Every odd number below 9, you get another -1.

## Proficiency

Characters are proficient in certain skills, saving throws, and tools based on class, background, and race. These are represented by filled-in bubbles/diamonds on the left side of your character sheet.

If you are making a check that you are proficent in, you get to add your proficiency bonus to your roll (in addition to the relevant stat, if applicable).

|    Level    | 1-4 | 5-8 | 9-12 | 13-16 | 17-20 |
|-|-:|-:|-:|-:|-:|
| Prof. Bonus |  +2 |  +3 |  +4  |   +5  |   +6  |

# Combat

When combat starts, the DM will tell the party to roll **initiative**, which represents how soon a character can act in combat. To roll initiative, roll a d20 and add your DEX modifier.

## Armor Class

**AC** represents how hard a character is to hit.

| Armor Type | AC |
|-|-|
| Unarmored | 10 + DEX |
| Light armor | Armor AC + DEX |
| Medium armor | Armor AC + min(DEX, 2) |
| Heavy armor | Armor AC |

There are different kinds of armor in each category - their properties can be found [here](https://roll20.net/compendium/dnd5e/Armor). Shields add a flat +2 to AC while equipped.

## Attacking

To hit someone with a weapon, you roll to see if you hit (with an **attack roll**), then if you hit, you roll to see how much damage you did (with a **damage roll**). To put some numbers to these examples, let's say you're a fighter with 16 AC, +3 STR, and +1 DEX. You're fighting a monster with 14 AC.

An **attack roll** determines whether you hit an enemy. Your attack roll has to be at least the enemy's AC to hit. Roll a d20, add the relevant stat, and add your proficiency bonus if you're proficient with the weapon.

Most melee weapons use STR, and most ranged weapons use DEX. So if you're attacking the monster, you'd get +5 to hit with melee (+3 STR, +2 proficiency) and +3 to hit at range (+1 DEX, +2 prof). So you'd need to roll at least 9 for melee and at least 11 at range to reach a total of 14.

A **damage roll** affects the amount of damage done when you hit. Roll the damage die for the weapon you hit with, and add the relevant stat (but *not* proficiency). If you crit, roll twice as many dice (the modifier stays the same).

With the same example stats - if your fighter hits with a longsword (which has a d10 damage die), you deal 1d10 + 3 damage (2d10 + 3 on crit). A light crossbow (d8 damage die) deals 1d8 + 1 on a hit (2d8 + 1 on crit).

## Death Saving Throws

Player characters and some NPCs fall unconscious upon reaching 0 HP. Each subsequent turn, the character must roll a death saving throw. A 10 or higher is a success, and a 9 or lower is a failure (no bonuses). Three successes and a character becomes stable but unconscious, so they don't have to make more saving throws - but three failures means the character dies. It doesn't have to be consecutive - successes and failures accumulate until the character reaches 3 of one kind.

Death saving throws reset once the character becomes stable (or is healed). Healing will instantly return a character to consciousness. An adjacent friendly character can make a DC 10 Medicine check to stabilize the dying character.

A nat 20 instantly returns the character to consciousness with 1 HP. A nat 1 counts as 2 failures. Getting hit while unconscious counts as a failed death saving throw.

## Your Turn

When taking a turn in combat, you get movement, an action, and possibly a bonus action. You also get a reaction every round (one between each of your turns).

### Movement

You can move up to the distance stated on your character sheet. 1 square in any direction = 5 feet, including diagonal squares. You can spread this movement out throughout your turn if you want.

You can also **take cover** for free if there's something convenient nearby. Half cover (covers about half of your body) gives +2 to AC and DEX saves, and 3/4 cover gives a +5 bonus. If totally covered, you can't be directly targeted by attacks/spells.

### Action

An action can be used to:

- Attack with one weapon

- Cast a spell (if the casting time is "1 action")

- Dash (double your movement)

- Dodge (Enemies' attacks have disadvantage to hit, and if you need to make a DEX saving throw, you have advantage)

- Disengage (Enemies will not take [opportunity attacks](#attack-of-opportunity) as you move out of their range)

- Help (Give advantage to a teammate, if you have proficiency with what they are trying to do)

- Hide (Make a stealth check against enemies' perception. If you pass, they don't know where you are)

- Ready (Define a condition and an action. If the condition occurs, you execute the action as your character's reaction. If the condition doesn't happen, the action isn't triggered)

### Bonus Action

You can only take a bonus action if something on your character sheet requires a bonus action - a spell, class feature, or something like that.

### Reaction

You can use a reaction to cast a spell with a casting time of a reaction (like Shield), use a readied action, or make an **attack of opportunity**:

When a character A leaves the controlled area of a hostile character B (all squares within 5 feet of B), B can use its reaction to make a melee attack on A before A moves. This is called an attack of opportunity, or an opportunity attack.

# Spellcasting

Some classes have access to spells, which can have powerful effects in both combat and RP. Spells are either **cantrips** which don't consume spell slots (see below), or they are **leveled spells** (unofficial term) which require spell slots. All information on a spell - its effects, level, range, duration, etc. can be found online at a website like [this](https://5e.tools/spells.html).

## Spell Slots

Spell slots limit how many powerful spells a caster can use in a day. Spell slots and leveled spells have an associated level from 1 to 9, with higher levels being more powerful. As a caster levels up, they get access to more spell slots, higher-level spell slots, and higher-level spells.

Spells require an equal or higher level spell slot to cast. Let's say you want to cast Fireball, which is a level 3 spell. You can choose to use a 3rd-level spell slot, which will deal 8d6 damage in a 20-foot radius, or if you have 4th-level slots (or higher), you can **upcast** the spell and use one of those higher-level slots instead, increasing the damage dealt by 1d6 for each level above 3rd.

## Spell Attack Bonus and Save DC

Targeting an enemy with a spell will either prompt you to make a **spell attack** or prompt the enemy to make a **saving throw**.

If you're making a spell attack, you get a bonus to hit (your **spell attack bonus**) equal to (proficiency + spellcasting stat). A level 5 wizard with 18 INT has +3 proficiency and +4 INT (wizard spellcasting stat), so they roll a d20, add 7, and check if the result beats the enemy's AC (this is basically the same method of calculating flat bonuses used for anything else). _Generally, spells will not get a stat-based damage bonus, unlike weapons._

If yoru spell forces the enemy to make a saving throw, the DC of that enemy's saving throw (your **spell save DC**) is (8 + proficiency + spellcasting stat). So if that same wizard casts fireball, the enemy has to beat a DC 15 DEX saving throw - if they succeed, the damage is halved.